README.md, before:

# Bio-Themed Agentic Office Suite (CODEX scaffold)

[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/E-TECH-PLAYTECH/BIOwerk/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/E-TECH-PLAYTECH/BIOwerk)
[![Tests](https://github.com/E-TECH-PLAYTECH/BIOwerk/workflows/Tests/badge.svg)](https://github.com/E-TECH-PLAYTECH/BIOwerk/actions)
[![Coverage](https://img.shields.io/badge/coverage-%E2%89%A580%25-brightgreen)](https://github.com/E-TECH-PLAYTECH/BIOwerk)

This repository is a production-oriented scaffold for an **agentic AI app suite** using biological/physical metaphors:

- **Nucleus** (Director/orchestrator)
- **Osteon** (Document program-agent)
- **Myocyte** (Analysis/Spreadsheet program-agent)
- **Synapse** (Presentation/Visualization program-agent)
- **Circadian** (Scheduler/Workflow program-agent)
- **Chaperone** (Adapter for import/export to external formats)
- **Matrix** (shared utilities, message envelope, canonicalization)

> Native artifact formats: `.osteon`, `.myotab`, `.synslide` (simple JSON-based containers).

## Quick start

```bash
# 1) Start all services
docker compose up --build

# 2) Open gateway (Mesh) docs:
# http://localhost:8080/docs

# 3) Try a draft with Osteon (Writer analogue) using API v1:
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/v1/osteon/draft -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d @examples/osteon_draft.json

# Note: Legacy unversioned endpoints still work but are deprecated:
# curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/osteon/draft ...
```

Need ongoing service insight? See [Operations](#operations) for observability and continuity guidance.

Looking for one command to get set up? Use the unified control script documented in [Installation and Operations](docs/INSTALLATION_AND_OPERATIONS.md).

## Installation Options

BIOwerk offers multiple installation methods to suit different use cases:

### 🚀 Portable Installation (Recommended for Quick Setup)

**No Docker required!** Perfect for development, testing, and lightweight deployments.

```bash
# Download and extract
tar -xzf biowerk-portable-1.0.0.tar.gz
cd biowerk-portable-1.0.0

# Install (creates ~/.biowerk by default)
./install.sh

# Start services
cd ~/.biowerk
./biowerk-start.sh
```

**Requirements:** Python 3.10+, 4GB RAM

**What you get:**
- ✅ All microservices running natively
- ✅ SQLite database (or connect to external PostgreSQL/MongoDB)
- ✅ Quick startup (~30 seconds)
- ✅ Low resource usage (~2GB disk, ~2GB RAM)
- ✅ Easy configuration via `.env` file

[More details in distribution/portable/README.md](distribution/portable/README.md)

### 🐳 Docker Installation (Recommended for Production)

**Full-featured deployment** with complete infrastructure stack.

```bash
# Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/E-TECH-PLAYTECH/BIOwerk.git
cd BIOwerk

# Start everything
docker compose up --build
```

**What you get:**
- ✅ Complete infrastructure (PostgreSQL, MongoDB, Redis)
- ✅ Monitoring stack (Prometheus, Grafana)
- ✅ Service isolation and orchestration
- ✅ Production-ready configuration
- ✅ Easy scaling with Kubernetes

### 📦 Platform-Specific Installers

**Desktop applications** with GUI management.

- **macOS**: Download `.dmg`, drag to Applications
- **Linux**: Download `.deb`, `.rpm`, `.AppImage`, or use installer script
- **Windows**: Download `.exe` installer or run PowerShell script

[Build instructions in distribution/README.md](distribution/README.md)

### 🔄 Choosing Your Installation Method

| Method | Best For | Setup Time | Resource Usage |
|--------|----------|------------|----------------|
| **Portable** | Development, testing, evaluation | ~5 min | Low (2GB) |
| **Docker** | Production, teams, full features | ~10 min | Medium (5GB) |
| **Desktop App** | End users, GUI preference | ~3 min | Low (3GB) |

## Security Features

BIOwerk implements enterprise-grade security features for production deployments:

### 🔒 TLS/HTTPS Encryption
- **TLS 1.2/1.3 support** with secure cipher suites
- **Self-signed certificates** for development (auto-generation)
- **CA-signed certificates** for production
- **Mutual TLS (mTLS)** for client certificate verification
- **Certificate validation** and expiration monitoring

**Quick Start:**
```bash
# Generate development certificates
python scripts/generate_certs.py

# Enable TLS in .env
TLS_ENABLED=true
TLS_CERT_FILE=./certs/cert.pem
TLS_KEY_FILE=./certs/key.pem

# Restart services
docker-compose restart
```

### 🛡️ Rate Limiting
- **Redis-backed** distributed rate limiting
- **Multiple strategies**: Fixed window, Sliding window, Token bucket
- **Per-IP and per-user** rate limiting
- **Configurable burst** handling
- **Standard headers** (`X-RateLimit-*`)

**Configuration:**
```bash
RATE_LIMIT_ENABLED=true
RATE_LIMIT_REQUESTS=100    # requests per window
RATE_LIMIT_WINDOW=60       # seconds
RATE_LIMIT_STRATEGY=sliding_window
```

### 🔍 Dependency Vulnerability Scanning
- **Automated scanning** with Safety and pip-audit
- **GitHub Actions** integration (CI/CD)
- **Pre-commit hooks** for local validation
- **Daily scheduled** scans
- **Docker image scanning** with Trivy

**Run Security Scan:**
```bash
# Full security audit
python scripts/security_scan.py --full

# Dependencies only
python scripts/security_scan.py --deps-only
```

### 🔐 Authentication & Authorization
- **JWT token-based** authentication (HS256/RS256)
- **API key management** with scopes and expiration
- **Role-based access control** (RBAC)
- **bcrypt password hashing**
- **Configurable token expiration**

**Production secret requirements:**
- The shipped defaults for `JWT_SECRET_KEY` and `ENCRYPTION_MASTER_KEY` are for local development only.
- Startup will fail in staging/production if either secret still matches the defaults; in development (`ENVIRONMENT=development|dev|local`) the app only warns so you do not ship them by mistake.
- Always set strong, environment-specific values (32+ characters, generated per environment) before deploying.
- Local/Docker: place secrets in your `.env` file or export them before running services:
  ```bash
  export JWT_SECRET_KEY=$(openssl rand -hex 64)
  export ENCRYPTION_MASTER_KEY=$(openssl rand -hex 64)
  docker-compose up -d
  ```
- Kubernetes/Helm: provide Kubernetes secrets so pods can read them (values align with `k8s/base/secrets.yaml` and Helm `NOTES.txt`):
  ```bash
  kubectl create secret generic app-secrets --from-literal=jwt_secret_key=$(openssl rand -hex 64) -n <namespace>
  kubectl create secret generic gdpr-secrets --from-literal=encryption_master_key=$(openssl rand -hex 64) -n <namespace>
  helm upgrade --install biowerk ./helm/biowerk -n <namespace>
  ```
  The chart respects `.Values.environment` (defaults to `production`) for `ENVIRONMENT` and mounts the secrets above into the pods; keep the secrets out of `values.yaml` and rotate them per environment.

### 📊 Security Monitoring
- **Prometheus metrics** for rate limits and auth events
- **Audit logging** with structured JSON
- **Health checks** for service availability
- **Security headers** in responses

**Comprehensive Documentation:**
- [Security Guide](docs/security.md) - Complete security documentation
- [Scripts README](scripts/README.md) - Security tools and scripts
- [GitHub Actions](.github/workflows/security.yml) - Automated scanning

## Architecture

- Each agent is a FastAPI microservice with typed endpoints.
- JSON-RPC–style payloads with canonical JSON and BLAKE3 state hashes.
- The **Mesh gateway** exposes a unified API surface and routes messages to agents.
- **Matrix** provides shared libs for canonicalization, hashing, and message schemas.

### API Versioning

BIOwerk implements comprehensive URL path-based API versioning for backward compatibility:

- **Format**: All endpoints use `/v{version}/` prefix (e.g., `/v1/osteon/draft`)
- **Current Version**: API v1 (stable)
- **Backward Compatibility**: Legacy unversioned endpoints still work with deprecation warnings
- **Auto-negotiation**: Defaults to latest version when no version specified

**Examples:**
```bash
# Versioned endpoint (recommended)
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/v1/osteon/draft \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d @examples/osteon_draft.json

# Legacy endpoint (works but deprecated)
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/osteon/draft \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d @examples/osteon_draft.json
```

**See:** [docs/API_VERSIONING.md](docs/API_VERSIONING.md) for complete versioning guide and migration instructions.

### Service Mesh Resilience

BIOwerk includes enterprise-grade resilience patterns for production deployments:

- **Circuit Breaker**: Prevents cascading failures by failing fast when services are down
- **Retry with Exponential Backoff**: Automatically retries transient failures
- **Bulkhead Pattern**: Isolates resource pools to prevent one service from exhausting connections
- **Health-Aware Routing**: Routes requests based on real-time service health

All patterns include comprehensive Prometheus metrics for observability. See [docs/SERVICE_MESH_RESILIENCE.md](docs/SERVICE_MESH_RESILIENCE.md) for detailed documentation.

**Configuration:**
```bash
# Enable all resilience patterns (default)
CIRCUIT_BREAKER_ENABLED=true
RETRY_ENABLED=true
BULKHEAD_ENABLED=true
HEALTH_CHECK_ENABLED=true
```

## Determinism

All service replies include a `state_hash = blake3-256(canonical_json(output))`.
Golden tests can assert output hashes for regression checks.

## Interop

**Chaperone** handles import/export (e.g., Office formats) without creating runtime coupling.
The core suite operates entirely on native formats.

## Operations

Production deployments should plan for consistent observability and disaster recovery. The suite’s FastAPI services run as discrete containers, so the patterns below apply uniformly across Mesh and every agent.

### Production overrides and rotation schedule

- **Secrets are mandatory** – Replace the development placeholders for `JWT_SECRET_KEY` and `ENCRYPTION_MASTER_KEY` before any staging or production rollout. The applications will refuse to start when defaults are detected in non-development environments. Generate 64+ byte secrets per environment and store them in a secrets manager (Vault, AWS Secrets Manager, GCP Secret Manager) instead of `.env`.
- **TLS is mandatory** – Set `TLS_ENABLED=true` everywhere outside local development and provide CA-signed certificates. In Docker Compose mount them at `./certs` or `/etc/biowerk/certs` with `TLS_CERT_FILE` and `TLS_KEY_FILE` pointing to the mounted paths. In Kubernetes, supply a `tls-certs` secret (or cert-manager `Certificate`) that backs the Mesh deployment volume.
- **Disable dev-only behaviors in production** – Run with `ENVIRONMENT=production`, `REQUIRE_AUTH=true`, and avoid exposing the unencrypted 8080 port on public interfaces. Do not deploy any `--reload` settings or mock/demo credentials. Keep rate limiting enabled (defaults are on) and avoid the legacy unversioned endpoints when fronting the stack with an ingress.
- **Rotation cadence (minimum)** – JWT and API gateway secrets: 90 days. Database credentials and Redis passwords: 180 days. TLS certificates: 60–90 days (Let’s Encrypt naturally enforces 90 days). Encryption master key: 180 days with dual-running windows and re-encryption of stored payloads. Rotate immediately after any incident, and document rotations in your runbook.
- **Audit the overrides** – At deployment time, assert that `ENVIRONMENT=production`, `TLS_ENABLED=true`, `REQUIRE_AUTH=true`, and that the secret material being read differs from defaults. Pair this with an automated check that the TLS certificate expiration is >30 days to avoid surprise outages.

#### Minimal hardened Docker Compose profile

Use an override file to force production settings and ensure secrets/certs are mounted read-only. The example below trims to core services while keeping HTTPS and authentication enforced:

```yaml
# docker-compose.prod.override.yml
services:
  mesh:
    profiles: ["prod-minimal"]
    environment:
      ENVIRONMENT: production
      REQUIRE_AUTH: "true"
      TLS_ENABLED: "true"
      TLS_CERT_FILE: /etc/biowerk/certs/tls.crt
      TLS_KEY_FILE: /etc/biowerk/certs/tls.key
    ports:
      - "8443:8443"   # expose only TLS
    volumes:
      - /etc/biowerk/certs:/etc/biowerk/certs:ro
    secrets:
      - jwt_secret_key
      - encryption_master_key
  osteon:
    profiles: ["prod-minimal"]
  myocyte:
    profiles: ["prod-minimal"]
  synapse:
    profiles: ["prod-minimal"]
  circadian:
    profiles: ["prod-minimal"]
  nucleus:
    profiles: ["prod-minimal"]
  chaperone:
    profiles: ["prod-minimal"]
  gdpr:
    profiles: ["prod-minimal"]
    environment:
      ENCRYPTION_KEY_ROTATION_DAYS: 90

secrets:
  jwt_secret_key:
    file: ./secrets/jwt_secret_key
  encryption_master_key:
    file: ./secrets/encryption_master_key
```

Run with `docker compose --profile prod-minimal -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose.prod.override.yml up -d` after placing strong secret material in `./secrets/`. This keeps dev-only services disabled, removes plaintext HTTP exposure, and mounts keys as read-only files.

#### Minimal hardened Kubernetes overlay

For clusters, create a lightweight overlay to force HTTPS and auth while pulling secrets from Kubernetes objects or an external secret operator:

```yaml
# k8s/overlays/production-minimal/kustomization.yaml
resources:
  - ../../base
patches:
  - target:
      kind: ConfigMap
      name: app-config
    patch: |-
      apiVersion: v1
      kind: ConfigMap
      metadata:
        name: app-config
        namespace: biowerk
      data:
        environment: "production"
        tls_enabled: "true"
        require_auth: "true"
  - target:
      kind: Deployment
      name: mesh
    patch: |-
      apiVersion: apps/v1
      kind: Deployment
      metadata:
        name: mesh
        namespace: biowerk
      spec:
        template:
          spec:
            volumes:
              - name: tls-certs
                secret:
                  secretName: tls-certs
                  optional: false
            containers:
              - name: mesh
                env:
                  - name: JWT_SECRET_KEY
                    valueFrom:
                      secretKeyRef:
                        name: app-secrets
                        key: jwt_secret_key
                  - name: REQUIRE_AUTH
                    value: "true"
                  - name: TLS_ENABLED
                    value: "true"
                ports:
                  - containerPort: 8443
                    name: https
```

Apply with `kubectl apply -k k8s/overlays/production-minimal`. Combine with cert-manager `Certificate` objects or a pre-provisioned `tls-certs` secret so Mesh only serves HTTPS. Keep ingress annotations that redirect HTTP→HTTPS and remove any dev-only deployments or init containers.

### Log aggregation

- **Structured logs** – Each container writes access/application logs to STDOUT. To guarantee structured JSON, extend the container command with a custom logging config:

  ```yaml
  # docker-compose.override.yml
  services:
    mesh:
      command:
        - uvicorn
        - main:app
        - --host
        - 0.0.0.0
        - --port
        - "8080"
        - --log-config
        - /config/logging.json
      volumes:
        - ./ops/logging.json:/config/logging.json:ro
  ```

- **Common tooling integration** – Ship the container logs to your preferred aggregator:
  - *Grafana Loki*: add a `promtail` sidecar that follows `/var/lib/docker/containers/*/*.log` and parses JSON.
  - *ELK / OpenSearch*: run Filebeat or Vector to tail the same Docker log files and forward them with the `json` codec.
  - *Cloud logging*: configure Fluent Bit with the Docker input (`tag mesh.*`) and forward to CloudWatch, Stackdriver, or Azure Monitor.

- **Retention** – Retain at least 7 days of INFO-level logs and 30 days of WARN+/AUDIT streams to support replaying canonical `Msg`/`Reply` envelopes when investigating incidents.

### Prometheus scraping

- **Metrics endpoints** – Mesh and each agent expose Prometheus-compatible metrics at `http://<service-host>:<port>/metrics`. For a local stack you can confirm with:

  ```bash
  curl http://localhost:8080/metrics    # Mesh gateway
  curl http://localhost:8001/metrics    # Osteon agent
  ```

- **Scrape configuration** – Point Prometheus at every container (adjust the hostnames when deploying outside of Compose):

  ```yaml
  scrape_configs:
    - job_name: "bio-suite"
      metrics_path: /metrics
      static_configs:
        - targets:
            - mesh:8080
            - osteon:8001
            - myocyte:8002
            - synapse:8003
            - circadian:8004
            - nucleus:8005
            - chaperone:8006
  ```

- **Dashboards** – Import Grafana dashboards for FastAPI/Uvicorn or build panels around `http_requests_total`, `http_request_duration_seconds_*`, and custom gauges emitted by each agent.

### Alert thresholds

- **Latency** – Page when the 95th percentile of `http_request_duration_seconds` exceeds 500 ms for five consecutive minutes (higher thresholds for heavy exports).
- **Error budget** – Alert on `increase(http_requests_total{status=~"5.."}[5m]) / increase(http_requests_total[5m]) > 0.02` to keep the aggregate error rate below 2%.
- **Availability** – Track a synthetic `up` gauge per container; raise a ticket if any agent is down for longer than 60 seconds.
- **Queue pressure** – Monitor application-specific counters (for example, `osteon_drafts_in_flight`) if you add them; pair alerts with Slack / PagerDuty routes in Alertmanager.

### Backup procedures

- **Configuration snapshots** – Version-control-sensitive files (`suite.yaml`, `schemas/`, `matrix/`) already live in Git. Take weekly tarball snapshots for operations by running `tar -czf backups/suite-config-$(date +%F).tgz suite.yaml schemas matrix` from the repository root.
- **Artifact exports** – Mount a persistent host directory (e.g., `./artifacts:/data/artifacts`) in Compose so generated `.osteon`, `.myotab`, and `.synslide` files are captured. Schedule nightly rsync (or cloud storage sync) of that directory.
- **Database / external stores** – If you attach external stateful services (PostgreSQL, object storage), follow their native backup tooling and document credentials in your runbook.
- **Disaster recovery drill** – Quarterly, rebuild the stack from backups (`docker compose up --build`), replay a representative set of artifacts through Mesh, and confirm `/metrics` plus structured logging are operational.

## License

Proprietary scaffold for CODEX handoff. Replace this with your project’s license.

Commit message:

Add demo assets and mesh walkthrough scripts

README.md, after:

# Bio-Themed Agentic Office Suite (CODEX scaffold)

[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/E-TECH-PLAYTECH/BIOwerk/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/E-TECH-PLAYTECH/BIOwerk)
[![Tests](https://github.com/E-TECH-PLAYTECH/BIOwerk/workflows/Tests/badge.svg)](https://github.com/E-TECH-PLAYTECH/BIOwerk/actions)
[![Coverage](https://img.shields.io/badge/coverage-%E2%89%A580%25-brightgreen)](https://github.com/E-TECH-PLAYTECH/BIOwerk)

This repository is a production-oriented scaffold for an **agentic AI app suite** using biological/physical metaphors:

- **Nucleus** (Director/orchestrator)
- **Osteon** (Document program-agent)
- **Myocyte** (Analysis/Spreadsheet program-agent)
- **Synapse** (Presentation/Visualization program-agent)
- **Circadian** (Scheduler/Workflow program-agent)
- **Chaperone** (Adapter for import/export to external formats)
- **Matrix** (shared utilities, message envelope, canonicalization)

> Native artifact formats: `.osteon`, `.myotab`, `.synslide` (simple JSON-based containers).

## Quick start

```bash
# 1) Start all services
docker compose up --build

# 2) Open gateway (Mesh) docs:
# http://localhost:8080/docs

# 3) Try a draft with Osteon (Writer analogue) using API v1:
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/v1/osteon/draft -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d @examples/osteon_draft.json

# Note: Legacy unversioned endpoints still work but are deprecated:
# curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/osteon/draft ...
```

Need ongoing service insight? See [Operations](#operations) for observability and continuity guidance.

Looking for one command to get set up? Use the unified control script documented in [Installation and Operations](docs/INSTALLATION_AND_OPERATIONS.md).

## Demo assets and walkthroughs

- Sanitized document, sheet, and slide datasets live in `examples/demo_assets`; stage them with `python examples/manage_demo_assets.py load`.
- Run the end-to-end showcase (draft, analyze, visualize) with `python examples/mesh_agent_showcase.py --dry-run` or open `examples/notebooks/mesh_agent_walkthrough.ipynb`.
- Full instructions and expected outputs are documented in [Demo Assets](docs/DEMO_ASSETS.md).

## Installation Options

BIOwerk offers multiple installation methods to suit different use cases:

### 🚀 Portable Installation (Recommended for Quick Setup)

**No Docker required!** Perfect for development, testing, and lightweight deployments.

```bash
# Download and extract
tar -xzf biowerk-portable-1.0.0.tar.gz
cd biowerk-portable-1.0.0

# Install (creates ~/.biowerk by default)
./install.sh

# Start services
cd ~/.biowerk
./biowerk-start.sh
```

**Requirements:** Python 3.10+, 4GB RAM

**What you get:**
- ✅ All microservices running natively
- ✅ SQLite database (or connect to external PostgreSQL/MongoDB)
- ✅ Quick startup (~30 seconds)
- ✅ Low resource usage (~2GB disk, ~2GB RAM)
- ✅ Easy configuration via `.env` file

[More details in distribution/portable/README.md](distribution/portable/README.md)

### 🐳 Docker Installation (Recommended for Production)

**Full-featured deployment** with complete infrastructure stack.

```bash
# Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/E-TECH-PLAYTECH/BIOwerk.git
cd BIOwerk

# Start everything
docker compose up --build
```

**What you get:**
- ✅ Complete infrastructure (PostgreSQL, MongoDB, Redis)
- ✅ Monitoring stack (Prometheus, Grafana)
- ✅ Service isolation and orchestration
- ✅ Production-ready configuration
- ✅ Easy scaling with Kubernetes

### 📦 Platform-Specific Installers

**Desktop applications** with GUI management.

- **macOS**: Download `.dmg`, drag to Applications
- **Linux**: Download `.deb`, `.rpm`, `.AppImage`, or use installer script
- **Windows**: Download `.exe` installer or run PowerShell script

[Build instructions in distribution/README.md](distribution/README.md)

### 🔄 Choosing Your Installation Method

| Method | Best For | Setup Time | Resource Usage |
|--------|----------|------------|----------------|
| **Portable** | Development, testing, evaluation | ~5 min | Low (2GB) |
| **Docker** | Production, teams, full features | ~10 min | Medium (5GB) |
| **Desktop App** | End users, GUI preference | ~3 min | Low (3GB) |

## Security Features

BIOwerk implements enterprise-grade security features for production deployments:

### 🔒 TLS/HTTPS Encryption
- **TLS 1.2/1.3 support** with secure cipher suites
- **Self-signed certificates** for development (auto-generation)
- **CA-signed certificates** for production
- **Mutual TLS (mTLS)** for client certificate verification
- **Certificate validation** and expiration monitoring

**Quick Start:**
```bash
# Generate development certificates
python scripts/generate_certs.py

# Enable TLS in .env
TLS_ENABLED=true
TLS_CERT_FILE=./certs/cert.pem
TLS_KEY_FILE=./certs/key.pem

# Restart services
docker-compose restart
```

### 🛡️ Rate Limiting
- **Redis-backed** distributed rate limiting
- **Multiple strategies**: Fixed window, Sliding window, Token bucket
- **Per-IP and per-user** rate limiting
- **Configurable burst** handling
- **Standard headers** (`X-RateLimit-*`)

**Configuration:**
```bash
RATE_LIMIT_ENABLED=true
RATE_LIMIT_REQUESTS=100    # requests per window
RATE_LIMIT_WINDOW=60       # seconds
RATE_LIMIT_STRATEGY=sliding_window
```

### 🔍 Dependency Vulnerability Scanning
- **Automated scanning** with Safety and pip-audit
- **GitHub Actions** integration (CI/CD)
- **Pre-commit hooks** for local validation
- **Daily scheduled** scans
- **Docker image scanning** with Trivy

**Run Security Scan:**
```bash
# Full security audit
python scripts/security_scan.py --full

# Dependencies only
python scripts/security_scan.py --deps-only
```

### 🔐 Authentication & Authorization
- **JWT token-based** authentication (HS256/RS256)
- **API key management** with scopes and expiration
- **Role-based access control** (RBAC)
- **bcrypt password hashing**
- **Configurable token expiration**

**Production secret requirements:**
- The shipped defaults for `JWT_SECRET_KEY` and `ENCRYPTION_MASTER_KEY` are for local development only.
- Startup will fail in staging/production if either secret still matches the defaults; in development (`ENVIRONMENT=development|dev|local`) the app only warns so you do not ship them by mistake.
- Always set strong, environment-specific values (32+ characters, generated per environment) before deploying.
- Local/Docker: place secrets in your `.env` file or export them before running services:
  ```bash
  export JWT_SECRET_KEY=$(openssl rand -hex 64)
  export ENCRYPTION_MASTER_KEY=$(openssl rand -hex 64)
  docker-compose up -d
  ```
- Kubernetes/Helm: provide Kubernetes secrets so pods can read them (values align with `k8s/base/secrets.yaml` and Helm `NOTES.txt`):
  ```bash
  kubectl create secret generic app-secrets --from-literal=jwt_secret_key=$(openssl rand -hex 64) -n <namespace>
  kubectl create secret generic gdpr-secrets --from-literal=encryption_master_key=$(openssl rand -hex 64) -n <namespace>
  helm upgrade --install biowerk ./helm/biowerk -n <namespace>
  ```
  The chart respects `.Values.environment` (defaults to `production`) for `ENVIRONMENT` and mounts the secrets above into the pods; keep the secrets out of `values.yaml` and rotate them per environment.

### 📊 Security Monitoring
- **Prometheus metrics** for rate limits and auth events
- **Audit logging** with structured JSON
- **Health checks** for service availability
- **Security headers** in responses

**Comprehensive Documentation:**
- [Security Guide](docs/security.md) - Complete security documentation
- [Scripts README](scripts/README.md) - Security tools and scripts
- [GitHub Actions](.github/workflows/security.yml) - Automated scanning

## Architecture

- Each agent is a FastAPI microservice with typed endpoints.
- JSON-RPC–style payloads with canonical JSON and BLAKE3 state hashes.
- The **Mesh gateway** exposes a unified API surface and routes messages to agents.
- **Matrix** provides shared libs for canonicalization, hashing, and message schemas.

### API Versioning

BIOwerk implements comprehensive URL path-based API versioning for backward compatibility:

- **Format**: All endpoints use `/v{version}/` prefix (e.g., `/v1/osteon/draft`)
- **Current Version**: API v1 (stable)
- **Backward Compatibility**: Legacy unversioned endpoints still work with deprecation warnings
- **Auto-negotiation**: Defaults to latest version when no version specified

**Examples:**
```bash
# Versioned endpoint (recommended)
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/v1/osteon/draft \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d @examples/osteon_draft.json

# Legacy endpoint (works but deprecated)
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/osteon/draft \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d @examples/osteon_draft.json
```

**See:** [docs/API_VERSIONING.md](docs/API_VERSIONING.md) for complete versioning guide and migration instructions.

### Service Mesh Resilience

BIOwerk includes enterprise-grade resilience patterns for production deployments:

- **Circuit Breaker**: Prevents cascading failures by failing fast when services are down
- **Retry with Exponential Backoff**: Automatically retries transient failures
- **Bulkhead Pattern**: Isolates resource pools to prevent one service from exhausting connections
- **Health-Aware Routing**: Routes requests based on real-time service health

All patterns include comprehensive Prometheus metrics for observability. See [docs/SERVICE_MESH_RESILIENCE.md](docs/SERVICE_MESH_RESILIENCE.md) for detailed documentation.

**Configuration:**
```bash
# Enable all resilience patterns (default)
CIRCUIT_BREAKER_ENABLED=true
RETRY_ENABLED=true
BULKHEAD_ENABLED=true
HEALTH_CHECK_ENABLED=true
```

## Determinism

All service replies include a `state_hash = blake3-256(canonical_json(output))`.
Golden tests can assert output hashes for regression checks.

## Interop

**Chaperone** handles import/export (e.g., Office formats) without creating runtime coupling.
The core suite operates entirely on native formats.

## Operations

Production deployments should plan for consistent observability and disaster recovery. The suite’s FastAPI services run as discrete containers, so the patterns below apply uniformly across Mesh and every agent.

### Production overrides and rotation schedule

- **Secrets are mandatory** – Replace the development placeholders for `JWT_SECRET_KEY` and `ENCRYPTION_MASTER_KEY` before any staging or production rollout. The applications will refuse to start when defaults are detected in non-development environments. Generate 64+ byte secrets per environment and store them in a secrets manager (Vault, AWS Secrets Manager, GCP Secret Manager) instead of `.env`.
- **TLS is mandatory** – Set `TLS_ENABLED=true` everywhere outside local development and provide CA-signed certificates. In Docker Compose mount them at `./certs` or `/etc/biowerk/certs` with `TLS_CERT_FILE` and `TLS_KEY_FILE` pointing to the mounted paths. In Kubernetes, supply a `tls-certs` secret (or cert-manager `Certificate`) that backs the Mesh deployment volume.
- **Disable dev-only behaviors in production** – Run with `ENVIRONMENT=production`, `REQUIRE_AUTH=true`, and avoid exposing the unencrypted 8080 port on public interfaces. Do not deploy any `--reload` settings or mock/demo credentials. Keep rate limiting enabled (defaults are on) and avoid the legacy unversioned endpoints when fronting the stack with an ingress.
- **Rotation cadence (minimum)** – JWT and API gateway secrets: 90 days. Database credentials and Redis passwords: 180 days. TLS certificates: 60–90 days (Let’s Encrypt naturally enforces 90 days). Encryption master key: 180 days with dual-running windows and re-encryption of stored payloads. Rotate immediately after any incident, and document rotations in your runbook.
- **Audit the overrides** – At deployment time, assert that `ENVIRONMENT=production`, `TLS_ENABLED=true`, `REQUIRE_AUTH=true`, and that the secret material being read differs from defaults. Pair this with an automated check that the TLS certificate expiration is >30 days to avoid surprise outages.

#### Minimal hardened Docker Compose profile

Use an override file to force production settings and ensure secrets/certs are mounted read-only. The example below trims to core services while keeping HTTPS and authentication enforced:

```yaml
# docker-compose.prod.override.yml
services:
  mesh:
    profiles: ["prod-minimal"]
    environment:
      ENVIRONMENT: production
      REQUIRE_AUTH: "true"
      TLS_ENABLED: "true"
      TLS_CERT_FILE: /etc/biowerk/certs/tls.crt
      TLS_KEY_FILE: /etc/biowerk/certs/tls.key
    ports:
      - "8443:8443"   # expose only TLS
    volumes:
      - /etc/biowerk/certs:/etc/biowerk/certs:ro
    secrets:
      - jwt_secret_key
      - encryption_master_key
  osteon:
    profiles: ["prod-minimal"]
  myocyte:
    profiles: ["prod-minimal"]
  synapse:
    profiles: ["prod-minimal"]
  circadian:
    profiles: ["prod-minimal"]
  nucleus:
    profiles: ["prod-minimal"]
  chaperone:
    profiles: ["prod-minimal"]
  gdpr:
    profiles: ["prod-minimal"]
    environment:
      ENCRYPTION_KEY_ROTATION_DAYS: 90

secrets:
  jwt_secret_key:
    file: ./secrets/jwt_secret_key
  encryption_master_key:
    file: ./secrets/encryption_master_key
```

Run with `docker compose --profile prod-minimal -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose.prod.override.yml up -d` after placing strong secret material in `./secrets/`. This keeps dev-only services disabled, removes plaintext HTTP exposure, and mounts keys as read-only files.

#### Minimal hardened Kubernetes overlay

For clusters, create a lightweight overlay to force HTTPS and auth while pulling secrets from Kubernetes objects or an external secret operator:

```yaml
# k8s/overlays/production-minimal/kustomization.yaml
resources:
  - ../../base
patches:
  - target:
      kind: ConfigMap
      name: app-config
    patch: |-
      apiVersion: v1
      kind: ConfigMap
      metadata:
        name: app-config
        namespace: biowerk
      data:
        environment: "production"
        tls_enabled: "true"
        require_auth: "true"
  - target:
      kind: Deployment
      name: mesh
    patch: |-
      apiVersion: apps/v1
      kind: Deployment
      metadata:
        name: mesh
        namespace: biowerk
      spec:
        template:
          spec:
            volumes:
              - name: tls-certs
                secret:
                  secretName: tls-certs
                  optional: false
            containers:
              - name: mesh
                env:
                  - name: JWT_SECRET_KEY
                    valueFrom:
                      secretKeyRef:
                        name: app-secrets
                        key: jwt_secret_key
                  - name: REQUIRE_AUTH
                    value: "true"
                  - name: TLS_ENABLED
                    value: "true"
                ports:
                  - containerPort: 8443
                    name: https
```

Apply with `kubectl apply -k k8s/overlays/production-minimal`. Combine with cert-manager `Certificate` objects or a pre-provisioned `tls-certs` secret so Mesh only serves HTTPS. Keep ingress annotations that redirect HTTP→HTTPS and remove any dev-only deployments or init containers.

### Log aggregation

- **Structured logs** – Each container writes access/application logs to STDOUT. To guarantee structured JSON, extend the container command with a custom logging config:

  ```yaml
  # docker-compose.override.yml
  services:
    mesh:
      command:
        - uvicorn
        - main:app
        - --host
        - 0.0.0.0
        - --port
        - "8080"
        - --log-config
        - /config/logging.json
      volumes:
        - ./ops/logging.json:/config/logging.json:ro
  ```

- **Common tooling integration** – Ship the container logs to your preferred aggregator:
  - *Grafana Loki*: add a `promtail` sidecar that follows `/var/lib/docker/containers/*/*.log` and parses JSON.
  - *ELK / OpenSearch*: run Filebeat or Vector to tail the same Docker log files and forward them with the `json` codec.
  - *Cloud logging*: configure Fluent Bit with the Docker input (`tag mesh.*`) and forward to CloudWatch, Stackdriver, or Azure Monitor.

- **Retention** – Retain at least 7 days of INFO-level logs and 30 days of WARN+/AUDIT streams to support replaying canonical `Msg`/`Reply` envelopes when investigating incidents.

### Prometheus scraping

- **Metrics endpoints** – Mesh and each agent expose Prometheus-compatible metrics at `http://<service-host>:<port>/metrics`. For a local stack you can confirm with:

  ```bash
  curl http://localhost:8080/metrics    # Mesh gateway
  curl http://localhost:8001/metrics    # Osteon agent
  ```

- **Scrape configuration** – Point Prometheus at every container (adjust the hostnames when deploying outside of Compose):

  ```yaml
  scrape_configs:
    - job_name: "bio-suite"
      metrics_path: /metrics
      static_configs:
        - targets:
            - mesh:8080
            - osteon:8001
            - myocyte:8002
            - synapse:8003
            - circadian:8004
            - nucleus:8005
            - chaperone:8006
  ```

- **Dashboards** – Import Grafana dashboards for FastAPI/Uvicorn or build panels around `http_requests_total`, `http_request_duration_seconds_*`, and custom gauges emitted by each agent.

### Alert thresholds

- **Latency** – Page when the 95th percentile of `http_request_duration_seconds` exceeds 500 ms for five consecutive minutes (higher thresholds for heavy exports).
- **Error budget** – Alert on `increase(http_requests_total{status=~"5.."}[5m]) / increase(http_requests_total[5m]) > 0.02` to keep the aggregate error rate below 2%.
- **Availability** – Track a synthetic `up` gauge per container; raise a ticket if any agent is down for longer than 60 seconds.
- **Queue pressure** – Monitor application-specific counters (for example, `osteon_drafts_in_flight`) if you add them; pair alerts with Slack / PagerDuty routes in Alertmanager.

### Backup procedures

- **Configuration snapshots** – Version-control-sensitive files (`suite.yaml`, `schemas/`, `matrix/`) already live in Git. Take weekly tarball snapshots for operations by running `tar -czf backups/suite-config-$(date +%F).tgz suite.yaml schemas matrix` from the repository root.
- **Artifact exports** – Mount a persistent host directory (e.g., `./artifacts:/data/artifacts`) in Compose so generated `.osteon`, `.myotab`, and `.synslide` files are captured. Schedule nightly rsync (or cloud storage sync) of that directory.
- **Database / external stores** – If you attach external stateful services (PostgreSQL, object storage), follow their native backup tooling and document credentials in your runbook.
- **Disaster recovery drill** – Quarterly, rebuild the stack from backups (`docker compose up --build`), replay a representative set of artifacts through Mesh, and confirm `/metrics` plus structured logging are operational.

## License

Proprietary scaffold for CODEX handoff. Replace this with your project’s license.
